Add R0 and transmission section to Pathogenesis (#121)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/07.pathogenesis.md

[What cells are primary infection sites for SARS-CoV-2?]
[What structural aspects allow for viral entry]?

#### Viral Replication and Spreading

[Renamed section with transmission dynamics below] 
[Basic introduction into replication cycle]
[What are the routes of transmission]

#### Reproduction Number and Dynamics of Transmission

> Accurate estimates of the reproduction number of a virus are crucial to understanding the dynamics of infection and to predict the effects of different interventions. The basic reproduction number, R0, is the expected number of new infections caused by one infected person, assuming no time dependence and a wholly susceptible population [@doi:10.1111/j.1467-9574.1996.tb01482.x]. The effective reproduction number, R(t), describes how the reproduction number may change over time, and is used to quantify deviations in R from R0, for example as some fraction of the population becomes infected, or as interventions are put into place. R0 and R(t) can be estimated directly from epidemiological data or inferred using mathematical modeling, the latter is typically based upon a classic epidemiological model structure: the susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model and its extensions [@doi:10.1126/science.272.5258.74]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accurate estimates of the reproduction number of a virus are crucial to understanding the dynamics of infection and to predict the effects of different interventions. 
The basic reproduction number, R0, is the expected number of new infections caused by one infected person, assuming no time dependence and a wholly susceptible population [@doi:10.1111/j.1467-9574.1996.tb01482.x]. 
The effective reproduction number, R(t), describes how the reproduction number may change over time, and is used to quantify deviations in R from R0, for example as some fraction of the population becomes infected, or as interventions are put into place. 
R0 and R(t) can be estimated directly from epidemiological data or inferred using mathematical modeling, the latter is typically based upon a classic epidemiological model structure: the susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model and its extensions [@doi:10.1126/science.272.5258.74]. 
```
Although it's weird to get used to, it actually works out quite nicely to put one sentence per line (because then it's easy to see which sentences have been changed when looking at the full manuscript). They will show up as a coherent paragraph in the text.

> R0 for COVID-19 is estimated to lie in the range R0=1.4-6.5 [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30260-9; @doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa021; @doi:10.1126/science.abb3221]; estimates vary considerably depending on the data and the methods used. Most estimates currently derive from populations in Asia, since outbreaks in Europe and North America are more recent. Data-derived estimates (i.e. those that do not incorporate SIR-type models into their analysis) typically predict lower values of R0. For data-derived estimates, in one study of international cases, the predicted value is R0=1.7 [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.20040329], in China (both Hubei province and nationwide), the value is predicted to lie in the range R0=2.0-3.6 [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3524675; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.25.919787; @doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30260-9], and on a cruise ship where an outbreak occurred, predicted R0=2.28 [@doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.033]. SIR model-derived estimates of R0 range from 2.0 - 6.5 in China [@doi:10.3390/jcm9020462; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.916726; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.20018549], R0=4.86 in Iran [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.20.20038422], and R0=4.8 in France [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915]. Using the same model as for the French population, this study estimated R0=2.6 in South Korea, which is consistent with other studies [@url:https://github.com/parksw3/Korea-analysis/blob/master/v1/korea.pdf]. From a meta-analysis of studies estimating R0, [@doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa021] predict the median as R0=2.79. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
R0 for COVID-19 is estimated to lie in the range R0=1.4-6.5 [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30260-9; @doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa021; @doi:10.1126/science.abb3221]; estimates vary considerably depending on the data and the methods used. 
Most estimates currently derive from populations in Asia, since outbreaks in Europe and North America are more recent. 
Data-derived estimates (i.e. those that do not incorporate SIR-type models into their analysis) typically predict lower values of R0. 
For data-derived estimates, in one study of international cases, the predicted value is R0=1.7 [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.20040329], in China (both Hubei province and nationwide), the value is predicted to lie in the range R0=2.0-3.6 [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3524675; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.25.919787; @doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30260-9], and on a cruise ship where an outbreak occurred, predicted R0=2.28 [@doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.033]. 
SIR model-derived estimates of R0 range from 2.0 - 6.5 in China [@doi:10.3390/jcm9020462; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.916726; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.20018549], R0=4.86 in Iran [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.20.20038422], and R0=4.8 in France [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915]. 
Using the same model as for the French population, this study estimated R0=2.6 in South Korea, which is consistent with other studies [@url:https://github.com/parksw3/Korea-analysis/blob/master/v1/korea.pdf]. 
From a meta-analysis of studies estimating R0, [@doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa021] predict the median as R0=2.79. 
```

> Inference of the effective reproduction number can provide insight into how populations respond to an infection, and the effectiveness of interventions. In China, R(t) was predicted to lie in the range 1.6-2.6 in Jan 2020, before travel restrictions [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30144-4]. R(t) decreased from 2.35 one week before travel restrictions were imposed (Jan 23, 2020), to 1.05 one week after. Using their model, the authors also estimate the probability of new outbreaks occurring: the probability of a single individual exporting virus causing a large outbreak is 17-25% assuming MERS-like or SARS-like transmission, and the probability of a large outbreak occurring after ≥4 infections exist at a new location is greater than 50%. An independent study came to similar conclusions: in a two-week period before Jan 23 finding R(t)=2.38, and decreasing to R(t) = 1.34 (using data from Jan 24 to Feb 3) or R(t)=0.98 (using data from Jan 24 to Feb 8) [@doi:10.1126/science.abb3221]. In South Korea, R(t) was inferred for Feb-Mar 2020 in two cities: Daegu (the center of the outbreak), and Seoul [@url:https://github.com/parksw3/Korea-analysis/blob/master/v1/korea.pdf]. Metro data was also analyzed to estimate the effects of social distancing measures. R(t) decreased in Daegu from around 3 to <1 over the period that social distancing measures were introduced. In Seoul, R(t) decreased slightly, but remained close to 1 (and larger than R(t) in Daegu). This highlights that social distancing measures appeared to work to contain the infection in Daegu, but that in Seoul, R(t) remains above 1, thus secondary outbreaks are possible. It also shows the importance of region-specific analysis: the large decline in case load nationwide is mainly due to the Daegu region, and could hide persistence of the epidemic in other regions, such as Seoul and Gyeonggi-do. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inference of the effective reproduction number can provide insight into how populations respond to an infection, and the effectiveness of interventions. 
In China, R(t) was predicted to lie in the range 1.6-2.6 in Jan 2020, before travel restrictions [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30144-4]. 
R(t) decreased from 2.35 one week before travel restrictions were imposed (Jan 23, 2020), to 1.05 one week after. 
Using their model, the authors also estimate the probability of new outbreaks occurring: the probability of a single individual exporting virus causing a large outbreak is 17-25% assuming MERS-like or SARS-like transmission, and the probability of a large outbreak occurring after ≥4 infections exist at a new location is greater than 50%. 
An independent study came to similar conclusions: in a two-week period before Jan 23 finding R(t)=2.38, and decreasing to R(t) = 1.34 (using data from Jan 24 to Feb 3) or R(t)=0.98 (using data from Jan 24 to Feb 8) [@doi:10.1126/science.abb3221]. 
In South Korea, R(t) was inferred for Feb-Mar 2020 in two cities: Daegu (the center of the outbreak), and Seoul [@url:https://github.com/parksw3/Korea-analysis/blob/master/v1/korea.pdf]. 
Metro data was also analyzed to estimate the effects of social distancing measures. 
R(t) decreased in Daegu from around 3 to <1 over the period that social distancing measures were introduced. 
In Seoul, R(t) decreased slightly, but remained close to 1 (and larger than R(t) in Daegu). 
This highlights that social distancing measures appeared to work to contain the infection in Daegu, but that in Seoul, R(t) remains above 1, thus secondary outbreaks are possible. 
It also shows the importance of region-specific analysis: the large decline in case load nationwide is mainly due to the Daegu region, and could hide persistence of the epidemic in other regions, such as Seoul and Gyeonggi-do. 
```

[What cells are primary infection sites for SARS-CoV-2?]
[What structural aspects allow for viral entry]?

#### Viral Replication and Spreading

[Renamed section with transmission dynamics below] 
[Basic introduction into replication cycle]
[What are the routes of transmission]

#### Reproduction Number and Dynamics of Transmission

Accurate estimates of the reproduction number of a virus are crucial to understanding the dynamics of infection and to predict the effects of different interventions.
The basic reproduction number, R~0~, is the expected number of new infections caused by one infected person, assuming no time dependence and a wholly susceptible population [@doi:10.1111/j.1467-9574.1996.tb01482.x].
The effective reproduction number, R~t~, describes how the reproduction number may change over time, and is used to quantify deviations in R from R~0~, for example as some fraction of the population becomes infected, or as interventions are put into place.

> R~0~ and R~t~ can be estimated directly from epidemiological data or inferred using mathematical modeling, the latter is typically based upon a classic epidemiological model structure: the susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model and its extensions [@doi:10.1126/science.272.5258.74]. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
R~0~ and R~t~ can be estimated directly from epidemiological data or inferred using mathematical modeling.
Modeling approaches are typically based upon a classic epidemiological model structure: the susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model and its extensions [@doi:10.1126/science.272.5258.74]. 
```

R~0~ for COVID-19 is estimated to lie in the range R~0~=1.4-6.5 [@doi:10/ggjvr7; @doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa021; @doi:10.1126/science.abb3221]; estimates vary considerably depending on the data and the methods used.
Most estimates currently derive from populations in Asia, since outbreaks in Europe and North America are more recent.
Data-derived estimates (i.e. those that do not incorporate SIR-type models into their analysis) typically predict lower values of R~0~.
For data-derived estimates, in one study of international cases, the predicted value is R~0~=1.7 [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.20040329], in China (both Hubei province and nationwide), the value is predicted to lie in the range R~0~=2.0-3.6 [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3524675; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.25.919787; @doi:10/ggjvr7], and on a cruise ship where an outbreak occurred, predicted R~0~=2.28 [@doi:10.1016/j.ijid.2020.02.033].

> SIR model-derived estimates of R~0~ range from 2.0 - 6.5 in China [@doi:10.3390/jcm9020462; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.916726; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.20018549], R~0~=4.86 in Iran [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.20.20038422], and R~0~=4.8 in France [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SIR model-derived estimates of R~0~ range from 2.0 - 6.5 in China [@doi:10.3390/jcm9020462; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.916726; @url:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952], R~0~=4.86 in Iran [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.20.20038422], and R~0~=4.8 in France [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915].
```
Maybe handle it like this for now? That is so weird, I think we've had other DOI from medRxiv!

> SIR model-derived estimates of R~0~ range from 2.0 - 6.5 in China [@doi:10.3390/jcm9020462; @url:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.916726; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.20018549], R~0~=4.86 in Iran [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.20.20038422], and R~0~=4.8 in France [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SIR model-derived estimates of R~0~ range from 2.0 - 6.5 in China [@doi:10.3390/jcm9020462; @url:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.01.27.20018952; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.916726; @doi:10.1101/2020.01.23.20018549] to R~0~=4.8 in France [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915]. 
```

> Using the same model as for the French population, this study estimated R~0~=2.6 in South Korea, which is consistent with other studies [@tag:Park2020_distancing].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the same model as for the French population, this study estimated R~0~=2.6 in South Korea [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.22.20040915], which is consistent with other studies [@tag:Park2020_distancing].
```

An independent study came to similar conclusions: in a two-week period before Jan 23 finding R~t~=2.38, and decreasing to R~t~ = 1.34 (using data from Jan 24 to Feb 3) or R~t~=0.98 (using data from Jan 24 to Feb 8) [@doi:10.1126/science.abb3221].
In South Korea, R~t~ was inferred for Feb-Mar 2020 in two cities: Daegu (the center of the outbreak), and Seoul [@tag:Park2020_distancing].
Metro data was also analyzed to estimate the effects of social distancing measures.
R~t~ decreased in Daegu from around 3 to <1 over the period that social distancing measures were introduced.
In Seoul, R~t~ decreased slightly, but remained close to 1 (and larger than R~t~ in Daegu).
This highlights that social distancing measures appeared to work to contain the infection in Daegu, but that in Seoul, R~t~ remains above 1, thus secondary outbreaks are possible.
It also shows the importance of region-specific analysis: the large decline in case load nationwide is mainly due to the Daegu region, and could hide persistence of the epidemic in other regions, such as Seoul and Gyeonggi-do. 

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly in Iran, estimates of R~t~ declined from 4.86 in the first week to 2.1 by the fourth week after the first cases in Iran were reported [@doi:10.1101/2020.03.20.20038422]. The authors attributed this decline to the effects of self-quarantine and government reductions in working time.

```
